todo.md, before:


# todo - feb 2025

Generally speaking the lower level sys layer should let me chain systems together - right now because of the lack of this we get packets flowing back through things that shouldn't need to see them.

There also seems to be a bug introduced with the visueme updates.


# todo jan 19 2025

	- puppet does support llm related physical animations; would be nice to turn this back on
	- global pub/sub is way overkill; must wire events more directly to each other to reduce traffic

	- on mobile vob and stt crash (detect and switch to built in voice)
	- on mobile audio echo cancellation fails in general
	- on mobile the local llm is crushed flat (replace with a static non llm simple thinker)
	- on mobile tts/diarization also crushing the system (replace with built in voice)

	- write a tts-sys module that uses built in voice; this would help mobile not fall over

	- why isn't the initial 'all systems nominal' animating the puppet mouth?
	- change icons for consistency
	- do that mobile mode thing

Commit message:

ux improvements, eye gaze turned on

todo.md, after:


# todo - feb 2025

	- introduce an overlay mode where the puppet is transparent over the web page in a corner as if it was a helper for that page
	- icons could just use emoji

	- puppet gaze focus on player is too frequent, and eyes pop a bit too much
	- puppet body physical animations are still turned off, turn back on

	- mobile improvement
		- cannot use built in voice out due to a lack of timing information - any way to estimate tts out duration?
		- tts out could compute visemes from phonemes to eliminate need for whisper (which crashes mobile out)
		- mobile audio echo cancellation seems to be totally broken
		- mobile llm is too heavy - crashes

## Refining orbital-sys

The orbital-sys component itself could support more direct chaining, where systems could be wired to each other.
At the moment the output of any system goes to sys as a whole.
The chain for each message should be built from specific observers.
For example we always want to unpack arrays and that is always an early event observer.
One approach is to leave publishing alone but to refine subscribing:
```
	sys({
		resolve: {
			tick: {}=>()
		}
	})
```

Another option is to directly wire systems to each other, this would reduce the name space collisions also in entity component naming.
